<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8" standalone="no"?>
<!DOCTYPE html><html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xmlns:m="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" xmlns:pls="http://www.w3.org/2005/01/pronunciation-lexicon" xmlns:ssml="http://www.w3.org/2001/10/synthesis" xmlns:svg="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg"><head><title>2</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="docbook-epub.css"/><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="epubbooks.css"/><meta name="generator" content="DocBook XSL Stylesheets Vsnapshot_9885"/><link rel="prev" href="ch01.xhtml" title="1"/><link rel="next" href="ch03.xhtml" title="3"/></head><body><header/><section class="chapter" title="2" epub:type="chapter" id="id460"><div class="titlepage"><div><div><h1 class="title">2</h1></div></div></div><p>The bunk house was a long, rectangular building. Inside, the walls were
whitewashed and the floor unpainted. In three walls there were small,
square windows, and in the fourth, a solid door with a wooden latch.
Against the walls were eight bunks, five of them made up with blankets
and the other three showing their burlap ticking. Over each bunk there
was nailed an apple box with the opening forward so that it made two
shelves for the personal belongings of the occupant of the bunk. And
these shelves were loaded with little articles, soap and talcum powder,
razors and those Western magazines ranch men love to read and scoff at
and secretly believe. And there were medicines on the shelves, and
little vials, combs; and from nails on the box sides, a few neckties.
Near one wall there was a black cast–iron stove, its stovepipe going
straight up through the ceiling. In the middle of the room stood a big
square table littered with playing cards, and around it were grouped
boxes for the players to sit on.</p><p>At about ten o’clock in the morning the sun threw a bright dust–laden
bar through one of the side windows, and in and out of the beam flies
shot like rushing stars.</p><p>The wooden latch raised. The door opened and a tall, stoop–shouldered
old man came in. He was dressed in blue jeans and he carried a big
push–broom in his left hand. Behind him came George, and behind George,
Lennie.</p><p>“The boss was expectin’ you last night,” the old man said. “He was sore
as hell when you wasn’t here to go out this morning.” He pointed with
his right arm, and out of the sleeve came a round stick–like wrist, but
no hand. “You can have them two beds there,” he said, indicating two
bunks near the stove.</p><p>George stepped over and threw his blankets down on the burlap sack of
straw that was a mattress. He looked into his box shelf and then picked
a small yellow can from it. “Say. What the hell’s this?”</p><p>“I don’t know,” said the old man.</p><p>“Says ‘positively kills lice, roaches and other scourges.’ What the hell
kind of bed you giving us, anyways. We don’t want no pants rabbits.”</p><p>The old swamper shifted his broom and held it between his elbow and his
side while he held out his hand for the can. He studied the label
carefully. “Tell you what—” he said finally, “last guy that had this
bed was a blacksmith—hell of a nice fella and as clean a guy as you
want to meet. Used to wash his hands even <span class="emphasis"><em>after</em></span> he ate.”</p><p>“Then how come he got graybacks?” George was working up a slow anger.
Lennie put his bindle on the neighboring bunk and sat down. He watched
George with open mouth.</p><p>“Tell you what,” said the old swamper. “This here blacksmith—name of
Whitey—was the kind of guy that would put that stuff around even if
there wasn’t no bugs—just to make sure, see? Tell you what he used to
do—At meals he’d peel his boil’ potatoes, an’ he’d take out ever’
little spot, no matter what kind, before he’d eat it. And if there was a
red splotch on an egg, he’d scrape it off. Finally quit about the food.
That’s the kinda guy he was—clean. Used ta dress up Sundays even when
he wasn’t going no place, put on a necktie even, and then set in the
bunk house.”</p><p>“I ain’t so sure,” said George skeptically. “What did you say he quit
for?”</p><p>The old man put the yellow can in his pocket, and he rubbed his bristly
white whiskers with his knuckles. “Why … he … just quit, the way
a guy will. Says it was the food. Just wanted to move. Didn’t give no
other reason but the food. Just says ‘gimme my time’ one night, the way
any guy would.”</p><p>George lifted his tick and looked underneath it. He leaned over and
inspected the sacking closely. Immediately Lennie got up and did the
same with his bed. Finally George seemed satisfied. He unrolled his
bindle and put things on the shelf, his razor and bar of soap, his comb
and bottle of pills, his liniment and leather wristband. Then he made
his bed up neatly with blankets. The old man said, “I guess the boss’ll
be out here in a minute. He was sure burned when you wasn’t here this
morning. Come right in when we was eatin’ breakfast and says, ‘Where the
hell’s them new men?’ An’ he give the stable buck hell, too.”</p><p>George patted a wrinkle out of his bed, and sat down. “Give the stable
buck hell?” he asked.</p><p>“Sure. Ya see the stable buck’s a nigger.”</p><p>“Nigger, huh?”</p><p>“Yeah. Nice fella too. Got a crooked back where a horse kicked him. The
boss gives him hell when he’s mad. But the stable buck don’t give a damn
about that. He reads a lot. Got books in his room.”</p><p>“What kind of a guy is the boss?” George asked.</p><p>“Well, he’s a pretty nice fella. Gets pretty mad sometimes, but he’s
pretty nice. Tell ya what—know what he done Christmas? Brang a gallon
of whisky right in here and says, ‘Drink hearty boys. Christmas comes
but once a year.’”</p><p>“The hell he did! Whole gallon?”</p><p>“Yes sir. Jesus, we had fun. They let the nigger come in that night.
Little skinner name of Smitty took after the nigger. Done pretty good,
too. The guys wouldn’t let him use his feet, so the nigger got him. If
he coulda used his feet, Smitty says he woulda kilted the nigger. The
guys said on account of the nigger’s got a crooked back, Smitty can’t
use his feet.” He paused in relish of the memory. “After that the guys
went into Soledad and raised hell. I didn’t go in there. I ain’t got the
poop no more.”</p><p>Lennie was just finishing making his bed. The wooden latch raised again
and the door opened. A little stocky man stood in the open doorway. He
wore blue jean trousers, a flannel shirt, a black, unbuttoned vest and a
black coat. His thumbs were stuck in his belt, on each side of a square
steel buckle. On his head was a soiled brown Stetson hat, and he wore
high–heeled boots and spurs to prove he was not a laboring man.</p><p>The old swamper looked quickly at him, and then shuffled to the door
rubbing his whiskers with his knuckles as he went, “Them guys just
come,” he said, and shuffled past the boss and out the door.</p><p>The boss stepped into the room with the short, quick steps of a
fat–legged man. “I wrote Murray and Ready I wanted two men this morning.
You got your work slips?” George reached into his pocket and produced
the slips and handed them to the boss. “It wasn’t Murray and Ready’s
fault. Says right here on the slip that you was to be here for work this
morning.”</p><p>George looked down at his feet. “Bus driver give us a bum steer,” he
said. “We hadda walk ten miles. Says we was here when we wasn’t. We
couldn’t get no rides in the morning.”</p><p>The boss squinted his eyes. “Well, I had to send out the grain teams
short two buckers. Won’t do any good to go out now till after dinner.”
He pulled his time book out of his pocket and opened it where a pencil
was stuck between the leaves. George scowled meaningfully at Lennie, and
Lennie nodded to show that he understood. The boss licked his pencil.
“What’s your name?”</p><p>“George Milton.”</p><p>“And what’s yours?”</p><p>George said, “His name’s Lennie Small.”</p><p>The names were entered in the book. “Le’s see, this is the twentieth,
noon the twentieth.” He closed the book. “Where you boys been working?”</p><p>“Up around Weed,” said George.</p><p>“You, too?” to Lennie.</p><p>“Yeah, him too,” said George.</p><p>The boss pointed a playful finger at Lennie. “He ain’t much of a talker,
is he?”</p><p>“No, he ain’t, but he’s sure a hell of a good worker. Strong as a bull.”</p><p>Lennie smiled to himself. “Strong as a bull,” he repeated.</p><p>George scowled at him, and Lennie dropped his head in shame at having
forgotten.</p><p>The boss said suddenly, “Listen, Small!” Lennie raised his head. “What
can you do?”</p><p>In a panic, Lennie looked at George for help. “He can do anything you
tell him,” said George. “He’s a good skinner. He can rassel grain bags,
drive a cultivator. He can do anything. Just give him a try.”</p><p>The boss turned on George. “Then why don’t you let him answer? What you
trying to put over?”</p><p>George broke in loudly, “Oh! I ain’t saying he’s bright. He ain’t. But I
say he’s a God damn good worker. He can put up a four hundred pound
bale.”</p><p>The boss deliberately put the little book in his pocket. He hooked his
thumbs in his belt and squinted one eye nearly closed. “Say—what you
sellin’?”</p><p>“Huh?”</p><p>“I said what stake you got in this guy? You takin’ his pay away from
him?”</p><p>“No, ’course I ain’t. Why ya think I’m sellin’ him out?”</p><p>“Well, I never seen one guy take so much trouble for another guy. I just
like to know what your interest is.”</p><p>George said, “He’s my … cousin. I told his old lady I’d take care of
him. He got kicked in the head by a horse when he was a kid. He’s
awright. Just ain’t bright. But he can do anything you tell him.”</p><p>The boss turned half away. “Well, God knows he don’t need any brains to
buck barley bags. But don’t you try to put nothing over, Milton. I got
my eye on you. Why’d you quit in Weed?”</p><p>“Job was done,” said George promptly.</p><p>“What kinda job?”</p><p>“We … we was diggin’ a cesspool.”</p><p>“All right. But don’t try to put nothing over, ’cause you can’t get away
with nothing. I seen wise guys before. Go on out with the grain teams
after dinner. They’re pickin’ up barley at the threshing machine. Go out
with Slim’s team.”</p><p>“Slim?”</p><p>“Yeah. Big tall skinner. You’ll see him at dinner.” He turned abruptly
and went to the door, but before he went out he turned and looked for a
long moment at the two men.</p><p>When the sound of his footsteps had died away, George turned on Lennie.
“So you wasn’t gonna say a word. You was gonna leave your big flapper
shut and leave me do the talkin’. Damn near lost us the job.”</p><p>Lennie stared hopelessly at his hands. “I forgot, George.”</p><p>“Yeah, you forgot. You always forget, an’ I got to talk you out of it.”
He sat down heavily on the bunk. “Now he’s got his eye on us. Now we got
to be careful and not make no slips. You keep your big flapper shut
after this.” He fell morosely silent.</p><p>“George.”</p><p>“What you want now?”</p><p>“I wasn’t kicked in the head with no horse, was I, George?”</p><p>“Be a damn good thing if you was,” George said viciously. “Save
ever’body a hell of a lot of trouble.”</p><p>“You said I was your cousin, George.”</p><p>“Well, that was a lie. An’ I’m damn glad it was. If I was a relative of
yours I’d shoot myself.” He stopped suddenly, stepped to the open front
door and peered out. “Say, what the hell you doin’ listenin’?”</p><p>The old man came slowly into the room. He had his broom in his hand. And
at his heels there walked a dragfooted sheep dog, gray of muzzle, and
with pale, blind old eyes. The dog struggled lamely to the side of the
room and lay down, grunting softly to himself and licking his grizzled,
moth–eaten coat. The swamper watched him until he was settled. “I wasn’t
listenin’. I was jus’ standin’ in the shade a minute scratchin’ my dog.
I jus’ now finished swampin’ our the wash house.”</p><p>“You was pokin’ your big ears into our business,” George said. “I don’t
like nobody to get nosey.”</p><p>The old man looked uneasily from George to Lennie, and then back. “I
jus’ come there,” he said. “I didn’t hear nothing you guys was sayin’. I
ain’t interested in nothing you was sayin’. A guy on a ranch don’t never
listen nor he don’t ast no questions.”</p><p>“Damn right he don’t,” said George, slightly mollified, “not if he wants
to stay workin’ long.” But he was reassured by the swamper’s defense.
“Come on in and set down a minute,” he said. “That’s a hell of an old
dog.”</p><p>“Yeah. I had ’im ever since he was a pup. God, he was a good sheep dog
when he was younger.” He stood his broom against the wall and he rubbed
his white bristled cheek with his knuckles. “How’d you like the boss?”
he asked.</p><p>“Pretty good. Seemed awright.”</p><p>“He’s a nice fella,” the swamper agreed. “You got to take him right.”</p><p>At that moment a young man came into the bunk house; a thin young man
with a brown face, with brown eyes and a head of tightly curled hair. He
wore a work glove on his left hand, and, like the boss, he wore
high–heeled boots. “Seen my old man?” he asked.</p><p>The swamper said, “He was here jus’ a minute ago, Curley. Went over to
the cook house, I think.”</p><p>“I’ll try to catch him,” said Curley. His eyes passed over the new men
and he stopped. He glanced coldly at George and then at Lennie. His arms
gradually bent at the elbows and his hands closed into fists. He
stiffened and went into a slight crouch. His glance was at once
calculating and pugnacious. Lennie squirmed under the look and shifted
his feet nervously. Curley stepped gingerly close to him. “You the new
guys the old man was waitin’ for?”</p><p>“We just come in,” said George.</p><p>“Let the big guy talk.”</p><p>Lennie twisted with embarrassment.</p><p>George said, “S’pose he don’t want to talk?”</p><p>Curley lashed his body around. “By Christ, he’s gotta talk when he’s
spoke to. What the hell are you gettin’ into it for?”</p><p>“We travel together,” said George coldly.</p><p>“Oh, so it’s that way.”</p><p>George was tense, and motionless. “Yeah, it’s that way.”</p><p>Lennie was looking helplessly to George for instruction.</p><p>“An’ you won’t let the big guy talk, is that it?”</p><p>“He can talk if he wants to tell you anything.” He nodded slightly to
Lennie.</p><p>“We jus’ come in,” said Lennie softly.</p><p>Curley stared levelly at him. “Well, nex’ time you answer when you’re
spoke to.” He turned toward the door and walked out, and his elbows were
still bent out a little.</p><p>George watched him out, and then he turned back to the swamper. “Say,
what the hell’s he got on his shoulder? Lennie didn’t do nothing to
him.”</p><p>The old man looked cautiously at the door to make sure no one was
listening. “That’s the boss’s son,” he said quietly. “Curley’s pretty
handy. He done quite a bit in the ring. He’s a lightweight, and he’s
handy.”</p><p>“Well, let him be handy,” said George. “He don’t have to take after
Lennie. Lennie didn’t do nothing to him. What’s he got against Lennie?”</p><p>The swamper considered…. “Well … tell you what. Curley’s like a
lot of little guys. He hates big guys. He’s alla time picking scraps
with big guys. Kind of like he’s mad at ’em because he ain’t a big guy.
You seen little guys like that, ain’t you? Always scrappy?”</p><p>“Sure,” said George. “I seen plenty tough little guys. But this Curley
better not make no mistakes about Lennie. Lennie ain’t handy, but this
Curley punk is gonna get hurt if he messes around with Lennie.”</p><p>“Well, Curley’s pretty handy,” the swamper said skeptically. “Never did
seem right to me. S’pose Curley jumps a big guy an’ licks him. Ever’body
says what a game guy Curley is. And s’pose he does the same thing and
gets licked. Then ever’body says the big guy oughtta pick somebody his
own size, and maybe they gang up on the big guy. Never did seem right to
me. Seems like Curley ain’t givin’ nobody a chance.”</p><p>George was watching the door. He said ominously, “Well, he better watch
out for Lennie. Lennie ain’t no fighter, but Lennie’s strong and quick
and Lennie don’t know no rules.” He walked to the square table and sat
down on one of the boxes. He gathered some of the cards together and
shuffled them.</p><p>The old man sat down on another box. “Don’t tell Curley I said none of
this. He’d slough me. He just don’t give a damn. Won’t ever get canned
’cause his old man’s the boss.”</p><p>George cut the cards and began turning them over, looking at each one
and throwing it down on a pile. He said, “This guy Curley sounds like a
son–of–a–bitch to me. I don’t like mean little guys.”</p><p>“Seems to me like he’s worse lately,” said the swamper. “He got married
a couple of weeks ago. Wife lives over in the boss’s house. Seems like
Curley is cockier’n ever since he got married.”</p><p>George grunted, “Maybe he’s showin’ off for his wife.”</p><p>The swamper warmed to his gossip. “You seen that glove on his left
hand?”</p><p>“Yeah. I seen it.”</p><p>“Well, that glove’s fulla vaseline.”</p><p>“Vaseline? What the hell for?”</p><p>“Well, I tell ya what—Curley says he’s keepin’ that hand soft for his
wife.”</p><p>George studied the cards absorbedly. “That’s a dirty thing to tell
around,” he said.</p><p>The old man was reassured. He had drawn a derogatory statement from
George. He felt safe now, and he spoke more confidently. “Wait’ll you
see Curley’s wife.”</p><p>George cut the cards again and put out a solitaire lay, slowly and
deliberately. “Purty?” he asked casually.</p><p>“Yeah. Purty … but——”</p><p>George studied his cards. “But what?”</p><p>“Well—she got the eye.”</p><p>“Yeah? Married two weeks and got the eye? Maybe that’s why Curley’s
pants is full of ants.”</p><p>“I seen her give Slim the eye. Slim’s a jerkline skinner. Hell of a nice
fella. Slim don’t need to wear no high–heeled boots on a grain team. I
seen her give Slim the eye. Curley never seen it. An’ I seen her give
Carlson the eye.”</p><p>George pretended a lack of interest. “Looks like we was gonna have fun.”</p><p>The swamper stood up from his box. “Know what I think?” George did not
answer. “Well, I think Curley’s married … a tart.”</p><p>“He ain’t the first,” said George. “There’s plenty done that.”</p><p>The old man moved toward the door, and his ancient dog lifted his head
and peered about, and then got painfully to his feet to follow. “I gotta
be settin’ out the wash basins for the guys. The teams’ll be in before
long. You guys gonna buck barley?”</p><p>“Yeah.”</p><p>“You won’t tell Curley nothing I said?”</p><p>“Hell no.”</p><p>“Well, you look her over, mister. You see if she ain’t a tart.” He
stepped out the door into the brilliant sunshine.</p><p>George laid down his cards thoughtfully, turned his piles of three. He
built four clubs on his ace pile. The sun square was on the floor now,
and the flies whipped through it like sparks. A sound of jingling
harness and the croak of heavy–laden axles sounded from outside. From
the distance came a clear call. “Stable Buck—ooh, sta–able Buck!” And
then, “Where the hell is that God damn nigger?”</p><p>George stared at his solitaire lay, and then he flounced the cards
together and turned around to Lennie. Lennie was lying down on the bunk
watching him.</p><p>“Look, Lennie! This here ain’t no set up. I’m scared. You gonna have
trouble with that Curley guy. I seen that kind before. He was kinda
feelin’ you out. He figures he’s got you scared and he’s gonna take a
sock at you the first chance he gets.”</p><p>Lennie’s eyes were frightened. “I don’t want no trouble,” he said
plaintively. “Don’t let him sock me, George.”</p><p>George got up and went over to Lennie’s bunk and sat down on it. “I hate
that kinda bastard,” he said. “I seen plenty of ’em. Like the old guy
says, Curley don’t take no chances. He always wins.” He thought for a
moment. “If he tangles with you, Lennie, we’re gonna get the can. Don’t
make no mistake about that. He’s the boss’s son. Look, Lennie. You try
to keep away from him, will you? Don’t never speak to him. If he comes
in here you move clear to the other side of the room. Will you do that,
Lennie?”</p><p>“I don’t want no trouble,” Lennie mourned. “I never done nothing to
him.”</p><p>“Well, that won’t do you no good if Curley wants to plug himself up for
a fighter. Just don’t have nothing to do with him. Will you remember?”</p><p>“Sure, George. I ain’t gonna say a word.”</p><p>The sound of the approaching grain teams was louder, thud of big hooves
on hard ground, drag of brakes and the jingle of trace chains. Men were
calling back and forth from the teams. George, sitting on the bunk
beside Lennie, frowned as he thought. Lennie asked timidly, “You ain’t
mad, George?”</p><p>“I ain’t mad at you. I’m mad at this here Curley bastard. I hoped we was
gonna get a little stake together—maybe a hundred dollars.” His tone
grew decisive. “You keep away from Curley, Lennie.”</p><p>“Sure I will, George. I won’t say a word.”</p><p>“Don’t let him pull you in—but—if the son–of–a–bitch socks you—let
’im have it.”</p><p>“Let ’im have what, George?”</p><p>“Never mind, never mind. I’ll tell you when. I hate that kind of a guy.
Look, Lennie, if you get in any kind of trouble, you remember what I
told you to do?”</p><p>Lennie raised up on his elbow. His face contorted with thought. Then his
eyes moved sadly to George’s face. “If I get in any trouble, you ain’t
gonna let me tend the rabbits.”</p><p>“That’s not what I meant. You remember where we slep’ last night? Down
by the river?”</p><p>“Yeah, I remember. Oh, sure I remember! I go there an’ hide in the
brush.”</p><p>“Hide till I come for you. Don’t let nobody see you. Hide in the brush
by the river. Say that over.”</p><p>“Hide in the brush by the river, down in the brush by the river.”</p><p>“If you get in trouble.”</p><p>“If I get in trouble.”</p><p>A brake screeched outside. A call came, “Stable—Buck. Oh! Sta–able
Buck.”</p><p>George said, “Say it over to yourself, Lennie, so you won’t forget it.”</p><p>Both men glanced up, for the rectangle of sunshine in the doorway was
cut off. A girl was standing there looking in. She had full, rouged lips
and wide–spaced eyes, heavily made up. Her fingernails were red. Her
hair hung in little rolled clusters, like sausages. She wore a cotton
house dress and red mules, on the insteps of which were little bouquets
of red ostrich feathers. “I’m lookin’ for Curley,” she said. Her voice
had a nasal, brittle quality.</p><p>George looked away from her and then back. “He was in here a minute ago,
but he went.”</p><p>“Oh!” She put her hands behind her back and leaned against the door
frame so that her body was thrown forward. “You’re the new fellas that
just come, ain’t ya?”</p><p>“Yeah.”</p><p>Lennie’s eyes moved down over her body, and though she did not seem to
be looking at Lennie she bridled a little. She looked at her
fingernails. “Sometimes Curley’s in here,” she explained.</p><p>George said brusquely, “Well he ain’t now.”</p><p>“If he ain’t, I guess I better look some place else,” she said
playfully.</p><p>Lennie watched her, fascinated. George said, “If I see him, I’ll pass
the word you was looking for him.”</p><p>She smiled archly and twitched her body. “Nobody can’t blame a person
for lookin’.” she said. There were footsteps behind her, going by. She
turned her head. “Hi, Slim,” she said.</p><p>Slim’s voice came through the door. “Hi, Good–lookin’.”</p><p>“I’m tryin’ to find Curley, Slim.”</p><p>“Well, you ain’t tryin’ very hard. I seen him goin’ in your house.”</p><p>She was suddenly apprehensive. “’Bye, boys,” she called into the bunk
house, and she hurried away.</p><p>George looked around at Lennie. “Jesus, what a tramp,” he said. “So
that’s what Curley picks for a wife.”</p><p>“She’s purty,” said Lennie defensively.</p><p>“Yeah, and she’s sure hidin’ it. Curley got his work ahead of him. Bet
she’d clear out for twenty bucks.”</p><p>Lennie still stared at the doorway where she had been. “Gosh, she was
purty.” He smiled admiringly. George looked quickly down at him and then
he took him by an ear and shook him.</p><p>“Listen to me, you crazy bastard,” he said fiercely. “Don’t you even
take a look at that bitch. I don’t care what she says and what she does.
I seen ’em poison before, but I never seen no piece of jail bait worse
than her. You leave her be.”</p><p>Lennie tried to disengage his ear. “I never done nothing, George.”</p><p>“No, you never. But when she was standin’ in the doorway showin’ her
legs, you wasn’t lookin’ the other way, neither.”</p><p>“I never meant no harm, George. Honest I never.”</p><p>“Well, you keep away from her, ’cause she’s a rat–trap if I ever seen
one. You let Curley take the rap. He let himself in for it. Glove fulla
vaseline,” George said disgustedly. “An’ I bet he’s eatin’ raw eggs and
writin’ to the patent medicine houses.”</p><p>Lennie cried out suddenly—“I don’ like this place, George. This ain’t
no good place. I wanna get outa here.”</p><p>“We gotta keep it till we get a stake. We can’t help it, Lennie. We’ll
get out jus’ as soon as we can. I don’t like it no better than you do.”
He went back to the table and set out a new solitaire hand. “No, I don’t
like it,” he said. “For two bits I’d shove out of here. If we can get
jus’ a few dollars in the poke we’ll shove off and go up the American
River and pan gold. We can make maybe a couple of dollars a day there,
and we might hit a pocket.”</p><p>Lennie leaned eagerly toward him. “Le’s go, George. Le’s get outta here.
It’s mean here.”</p><p>“We gotta stay,” George said shortly. “Shut up now. The guys’ll be
comin’ in.”</p><p>From the washroom nearby came the sound of running water and rattling
basins. George studied the cards. “Maybe we oughtta wash up,” he said.
“But we ain’t done nothing to get dirty.”</p><p>A tall man stood in the doorway. He held a crushed Stetson hat under his
arm while he combed his long, black, damp hair straight back. Like the
others he wore blue jeans and a short denim jacket. When he had finished
combing his hair he moved into the room, and he moved with a majesty
only achieved by royalty and master craftsmen. He was a jerkline
skinner, the prince of the ranch, capable of driving ten, sixteen, even
twenty mules with a single line to the leaders. He was capable of
killing a fly on the wheeler’s butt with a bull whip without touching
the mule. There was a gravity in his manner and a quiet so profound that
all talk stopped when he spoke. His authority was so great that his word
was taken on any subject, be it politics or love. This was Slim, the
jerkline skinner. His hatchet face was ageless. He might have been
thirty–five or fifty. His ear heard more than was said to him, and his
slow speech had overtones not of thought, but of understanding beyond
thought. His hands, large and lean, were as delicate in their action as
those of a temple dancer.</p><p>He smoothed out his crushed hat, creased it in the middle and put it on.
He looked kindly at the two in the bunk house. “It’s brighter’n a bitch
outside,” he said gently. “Can’t hardly see nothing in here. You the new
guys?”</p><p>“Just come,” said George.</p><p>“Gonna buck barley?”</p><p>“That’s what the boss says.”</p><p>Slim sat down on a box across the table from George. He studied the
solitaire hand that was upside down to him. “Hope you get on my team,”
he said. His voice was very gentle. “I gotta pair of punks on my team
that don’t know a barley bag from a blue ball. You guys ever bucked any
barley?”</p><p>“Hell, yes,” said George. “I ain’t nothing to scream about, but that big
bastard there can put up more grain alone than most pairs can.”</p><p>Lennie, who had been following the conversation back and forth with his
eyes, smiled complacently at the compliment. Slim looked approvingly at
George for having given the compliment. He leaned over the table and
snapped the corner of a loose card. “You guys travel around together?”
His tone was friendly. It invited confidence without demanding it.</p><p>“Sure,” said George. “We kinda look after each other.” He indicated
Lennie with his thumb. “He ain’t bright. Hell of a good worker, though.
Hell of a nice fella, but he ain’t bright. I’ve knew him for a long
time.”</p><p>Slim looked through George and beyond him. “Ain’t many guys travel
around together,” he mused. “I don’t know why. Maybe ever’body in the
whole damn world is scared of each other.”</p><p>“It’s a lot nicer to go around with a guy you know,” said George.</p><p>A powerful, big–stomached man came into the bunk house. His head still
dripped water from the scrubbing and dousing. “Hi, Slim,” he said, and
then stopped and stared at George and Lennie.</p><p>“These guys jus’ come,” said Slim by way of introduction.</p><p>“Glad ta meet ya,” the big man said. “My name’s Carlson.”</p><p>“I’m George Milton. This here’s Lennie Small.”</p><p>“Glad ta meet ya,” Carlson said again. “He ain’t very small.” He
chuckled softly at his joke. “Ain’t small at all,” he repeated. “Meant
to ask you, Slim—how’s your bitch? I seen she wasn’t under your wagon
this morning.”</p><p>“She slang her pups last night,” said Slim. “Nine of ’em. I drowned four
of ’em right off. She couldn’t feed that many.”</p><p>“Got five left, huh?”</p><p>“Yeah, five. I kept the biggest.”</p><p>“What kinda dogs you think they’re gonna be?”</p><p>“I dunno,” said Slim. “Some kinda shepherds, I guess. That’s the most
kind I seen around here when she was in heat.”</p><p>Carlson went on, “Got five pups, huh. Gonna keep all of ’em?”</p><p>“I dunno. Have to keep ’em a while so they can drink Lulu’s milk.”</p><p>Carlson said thoughtfully, “Well, looka here, Slim. I been thinkin’.
That dog of Candy’s is so God damn old he can’t hardly walk. Stinks like
hell, too. Ever’ time he comes into the bunk house I can smell him for
two, three days. Why’n’t you get Candy to shoot his old dog and give him
one of the pups to raise up? I can smell that dog a mile away. Got no
teeth, damn near blind, can’t eat. Candy feeds him milk. He can’t chew
nothing else.”</p><p>George had been staring intently at Slim. Suddenly a triangle began to
ring outside, slowly at first, and then faster and faster until the beat
of it disappeared into one ringing sound. It stopped as suddenly as it
had started.</p><p>“There she goes,” said Carlson.</p><p>Outside, there was a burst of voices as a group of men went by.</p><p>Slim stood up slowly and with dignity. “You guys better come on while
they’s still something to eat. Won’t be nothing left in a couple of
minutes.”</p><p>Carlson stepped back to let Slim precede him, and then the two of them
went out the door.</p><p>Lennie was watching George excitedly. George rumpled his cards into a
messy pile. “Yeah!” George said, “I heard him, Lennie. I’ll ask him.”</p><p>“A brown and white one,” Lennie cried excitedly.</p><p>“Come on. Le’s get dinner. I don’t know whether he got a brown and white
one.”</p><p>Lennie didn’t move from his bunk. “You ask him right away, George, so he
won’t kill no more of ’em.”</p><p>“Sure. Come on now, get up on your feet.”</p><p>Lennie rolled off his bunk and stood up, and the two of them started for
the door. Just as they reached it, Curley bounced in.</p><p>“You seen a girl around here?” he demanded angrily.</p><p>George said coldly. “’Bout half an hour ago maybe.”</p><p>“Well what the hell was she doin’?”</p><p>George stood still, watching the angry little man. He said insultingly,
“She said—she was lookin’ for you.”</p><p>Curley seemed really to see George for the first time. His eyes flashed
over George, took in his height, measured his reach, looked at his trim
middle. “Well, which way’d she go?” he demanded at last.</p><p>“I dunno,” said George. “I didn’t watch her go.”</p><p>Curley scowled at him, and turning, hurried out the door.</p><p>George said, “Ya know, Lennie, I’m scared I’m gonna tangle with that
bastard myself. I hate his guts. Jesus Christ! Come on. They won’t be a
damn thing left to eat.”</p><p>They went out the door. The sunshine lay in a thin line under the
window. From a distance there could be heard a rattle of dishes.</p><p>After a moment the ancient dog walked lamely in through the open door.
He gazed about with mild, half–blind eyes. He sniffed, and then lay down
and put his head between his paws. Curley popped into the doorway again
and stood looking into the room. The dog raised his head, but when
Curley jerked out, the grizzled head sank to the floor again.</p></section><footer/></body></html>